Fixes #615 - Add documentation for upgrade procedure (#621)
theforeman/foremanctl: docs/user/upgrade.md

# Upgrading foremanctl

> Foremanctl releases bundle specific versions of Foreman with version-compatible dependencies and plugins.
> 
> For nearly all install situations, upgrading your Foreman server should be approached through upgrading foremanctl. Scroll to the correct procedure below which matches your installation environment type (RPM and disconnected RPM).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Foremanctl releases bundle-specific versions of Foreman with version-compatible dependencies and plugins. Upgrading your containerized Foreman server should be approached through upgrading foremanctl. Scroll to the matching installation environment type procedure below (internet-connected RPM install or disconnected RPM install).
```

Reviewer: @evgeni  @ehelms Sorry to pull you guys in. I'm not entirely sure this is the correct language and I'd like to ensure I'm understanding everything correctly before suggesting more changes to the procedure below.

Please let me know if this is an incorrect understanding of our current versioning strategy:

- Foremanctl's version controls the image that is pulled for Foreman's components. On foremanctl deploy, a container image will be pulled from quay and migrations will run to bump the old N-2 or N-1 install to N. This all works today.
- We control foremanctl's version through the currently installed foreman-release.rpm that users manually install to bump versions? Not a subscribed repository or anything but the actual foreman rpm? 
    - Is there a dependency setup on foremanctl such that the latest version supporting foreman-release-X.Y is what ends up on the machine? Or do users need to manually coordinate foremanctl version still?
    - I'm definitely misunderstanding this but why are users installing the foreman RPM then downloading a quay image that contains the same foreman rpm?

Reviewer: Sorry if this was addressed in a prior conversation and I missed it. I've been out for a while.

> For nearly all install situations, upgrading your Foreman server should be approached through upgrading foremanctl. Scroll to the correct procedure below which matches your installation environment type (RPM, disconnected RPM, source).

Reviewer 2: Upgrading from source is in a different file and in deverloper-facing documentation. Should it be listed here?

## Upgrading foremanctl from RPM install

> All steps must be run as root user. We also recommend that a `foremanctl health` check is run before these steps.

Reviewer: I suggest moving `foremanctl health` to step 1 below instead of having it here.

> 1. Update the Foreman repository to the target version for the X or Y stream upgrades:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Update the Foreman repository to the next X or Y release:
```

>     - `dnf upgrade https://yum.theforeman.org/releases/<next-version>/el9/x86_64/foreman-release.rpm`

Reviewer: See https://github.com/theforeman/foremanctl/pull/621/changes#r3738946826 - I don't know enough about this to know how to fix the steps yet. This feels backwards to me though.

>     - `dnf upgrade https://yum.theforeman.org/releases/<target-version>/el9/x86_64/foreman-release.rpm`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - `dnf upgrade https://yum.theforeman.org/releases/<next-version>/el9/x86_64/foreman-release.rpm`
    - Sequential upgrades of X (3.19->5.0) or Y versions (3.18->3.19) of Foreman are required.
```

    - The foremanctl RPM can be downloaded from `https://yum.theforeman.org`
    - Once staged, `dnf info foremanctl` will resolve as in a connected environment.
2. Stage the required container images
    - On a connected machine, pull all required images with `foremanctl pull-images`.
    - Confirm the correct images were downloaded by running `podman images` on both the connected and disconnected machines. All images from your previous-version disconnected environment should be present on the connected environment. If images are missing, ensure parameters are identical between machines.
    - On the connected environment, run `podman save $(podman images --format "{{.Repository}}:{{.Tag}}" | tr '\n' ' ') -o <filename>.tar` to export all downloaded images as a tarball.
    - Transfer the tar file to your disconnected environment via an available transport mechanism.
    - Run `podman load -i <filename>.tar` to stage the required images.
3. Complete the [Upgrading foremanctl from RPM install](#upgrading-foremanctl-from-rpm-install) section above starting from step 3 to install from locally staged packages and images.

> ## Recovering from a failed upgrade

Reviewer: Now that backup / deploy are merged I would love if we could add a section on restoring to N-1 like we talked about above. @aidenfine would you like me to work on this at some point?

# Upgrading foremanctl

Foremanctl releases bundle specific versions of Foreman with version-compatible dependencies and plugins.

For nearly all install situations, upgrading your Foreman server should be approached through upgrading foremanctl. Scroll to the correct procedure below which matches your installation environment type (RPM, disconnected RPM, source).

## Upgrading foremanctl from RPM install

All steps must be run as root user. We also recommend that a `foremanctl health` check is run before these steps.

> 1. Update the Foreman repository to the target version:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Update the Foreman repository to the target version for X or Y stream upgrades:
```

This alerts users that they do not need to update the repo for patch-level updates.

>     - `dnf install https://yum.theforeman.org/releases/<target-version>/el9/x86_64/foreman-release.rpm`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - `dnf upgrade https://yum.theforeman.org/releases/<target-version>/el9/x86_64/foreman-release.rpm`
```

Just to be more consistent with the existing docs.

# Upgrading foremanctl

Foremanctl releases bundle specific versions of Foreman with version-compatible dependencies and plugins.

For nearly all install situations, upgrading your Foreman server should be approached through upgrading foremanctl. Scroll to the correct procedure below which matches your installation environment type (RPM, disconnected RPM, source).

> ## Upgrading foremanctl from RPM install

Reviewer 4: This procedure doesn't explain to the user where to get the new version of `foremanctl`. I would expect it to include managing the Foreman repository. I think the title here is also confusing as it talks about "upgrading foremanctl". But upgrading foremanctl inherently means also updating or upgrading Foreman. Right now, we do not support one without the other. Therefore, I think the focus needs to be on "How do I upgrade my installation from X.Y to X.Y+1"

Reviewer 3: @aidenfine it might help to run through the upgrading and updating guides in the existing documentation to understand how we handle defining repositories. I _think_ the general strategy for how we manage the repo will stay the same.

All steps must be run as root user. We also recommend that a `foremanctl health` check is run before these steps.

1. We recommend setting up a dnf versionlock for foremanctl if control over Foreman versioning is critical to your use case. If applicable, please take a moment to review your current versionlock configuration:
    - `dnf versionlock list` - View the current versionlock configuration
    - `dnf versionlock add 'foremanctl-X.*'` - Lock upgrades to a certain X-stream (replace with exact X version).
    - `dnf versionlock add 'foremanctl-X.Y.*'` - Lock upgrades to a certain Y-stream (replace with exact X.Y version).

>     - `dnf versionlock delete foremanctl` - Remove any foremanctl versionlock.

Reviewer 3: Upstream we "lock" users into specific versions of packages by the repository. That way, a user can `dnf upgrade` without fear of pulling in something strange. It's one reason why we don't support installations with EPEL enabled on them.

If we continue to guide users to enable only the correct Foreman repository, they should not have to worry about `versionlock`. Plus - we don't really want to "recommend" specific upgrade setups. If users are doing different things, it can make supporting them difficult.

    - The foremanctl RPM can be downloaded from TODO: TBD
    - Once staged, `dnf info foremanctl` will resolve as in a connected environment.
2. Stage the required container images
    - On a connected machine, pull all required images with `foremanctl pull-images`.
    - Confirm the correct images were downloaded by running `podman images` on both the connected and disconnected machines. All images from your previous-version disconnected environment should be present on the connected environment. If images are missing, ensure parameters are identical between machines.
    - On the connected environment, run `podman save $(podman images --format "{{.Repository}}:{{.Tag}}" | tr '\n' ' ') -o <filename>.tar` to export all downloaded images as a tarball.
    - Transfer the tar file to your disconnected environment via an available transport mechanism.
    - Run `podman load -i <filename>.tar` to stage the required images.
3. Complete the [Upgrading foremanctl from RPM install](#upgrading-foremanctl-from-rpm-install) section above to install from locally staged packages and images.

> ## Recovering from a failed upgrade

Reviewer 3: The troubleshooting section should probably have a section about varying Ansible errors, after which a user should probably open up an issue on GitHub or a post at community.theforeman.org.

Author: Is there any link to common Ansible errors that may occur?

In the event of a failed upgrade, don't panic! A failed deploy will typically reveal the details of what went wrong and can give hints regarding the nature of your issue. Here are some troubleshooting steps:

#### (RPM install) `dnf upgrade foremanctl` had "Nothing to do"
Run `dnf versionlock list` to see if your system is configured to allow X or Y version upgrades. Update the versionlock using the steps above.

#### `foremanctl deploy` could not pull images from remote
Ensure that https://quay.io is unblocked on your network. You can manually open https://quay.io/foreman/foreman in a browser to view available images.

#### I'd like to roll back to a known working version (RPM install)

> `dnf downgrade foremanctl-X.Y.Z` will roll back your foremanctl install to the requested version. Please follow instructions in our [Restore Guide](restore.md) to restore your system to a working state.

Reviewer 3: I'm not certain that this is safe, an older version of foremanctl might clash with a newer versions context files. Also, Foreman has never supported downgrades in the past with `foreman-installer`.

# Upgrading foremanctl

> Foremanctl releases bundle specific versions of Foreman with version-compatible dependencies and plugins.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

Foremanctl releases bundle specific versions of Foreman with version-compatible dependencies and plugins.
```

For nearly all install situations, upgrading your Foreman server should be approached through upgrading foremanctl. Scroll to the correct procedure below which matches your installation environment type (RPM, disconnected RPM, source).

> 

Reviewer 4: A couple extra empty lines here.

## Upgrading foremanctl from RPM install

> All below steps must be run as root user. We also recommend that a `foremanctl health` check is run before these steps.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
All steps must be run as root user. We also recommend that a `foremanctl health` check is run before these steps.
```

1. We recommend setting up a dnf versionlock for foremanctl if control over Foreman versioning is critical to your use case. If applicable, please take a moment to review your current versionlock configuration:
    - `dnf versionlock list` - View the current versionlock configuration
    - `dnf versionlock add 'foremanctl-X.*'` - Lock upgrades to a certain X-stream (replace with exact X version).
    - `dnf versionlock add 'foremanctl-X.Y.*'` - Lock upgrades to a certain Y-stream (replace with exact X.Y version).
    - `dnf versionlock delete foremanctl` - Remove any foremanctl versionlock.
2. We recommend a full foremanctl backup before all upgrade operations. Run `foremanctl backup <filepath for backup>`.  Please see [Backup](backup.md) for more information on this process.
3. Begin the upgrade by stopping all Foreman processes with `systemctl stop foreman.target`.
4. Upgrade foremanctl using dnf:
    - Upgrade to latest version (or latest allowed by versionlock): `dnf upgrade foremanctl`

>     - Upgrade to specific version: `dnf upgrade foremanctl-X.Y.Z`

Reviewer 4: I vote we drop this line. This should be a special case, not something we encourage users to do as we won't be testing this scenario.

> 5. Run upgrade tasks by re-deploying foremanctl with your customized deploy command: `foremanctl deploy [...]`. Please see [Parameters](parameters.md) for available deploy options.

Reviewer 4: The `customized deploy command` part I think can lead to confusion or is an advanced upgrade path that I don't think we should encourage. We generally want user upgrade path to be just run deploy, not run it with extra options.

Author: What do you think of the way it is worded now?

This final deploy command will pull new images and run all upgrade jobs required by Foreman, its dependencies, and your configured plugins. Expect this deploy to take longer than typical deploys.

> ## Upgrading foremanctl from disconnected RPM install

Reviewer 3: "RPM install" makes me think un-containerized Foreman and "upgrade" typically means a y-stream upgrade in our historic verbiage.

Author: Do you have a suggestion for what this should be?

Reviewer 4: See https://github.com/theforeman/foremanctl/pull/621/changes#r3639168322 

I think this procedure is a little better, but we shouldn't think about foremanctl by itself -- it has dependencies. The repositories matter.

Reviewer 3: For the naming of this section, I might suggest something like 

```suggestion
## Updating the foremanctl RPM
```

> All below steps must be run as root user.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
All steps must be run as root user.
```

Reviewer 4: Mention health check here also?

1. Stage the foremanctl RPM package

>     - The foremanctl RPM must be available in a repository accessible to your disconnected Foreman server. Please transfer the RPM to your disconnected system via an available transport mechanism (USB drive, rsync over a bastion, etc.).

Reviewer 4: Is the RPM enough? Or will they need the Foreman repository for dependencies?

Author: If I recall you should also need the repo for the deps, let me test right now.

Author: @ehelms Take a look I added an extra bullet point what do you think?

Reviewer 3: I would recommend telling users to stage the entire repository locally. `python3.12-obsah` is a dependency of foremanctl for example, and users may want to update it even if the update isn't a hard requirement. One reason could be for a CVE, for example.

# Upgrading foremanctl
Foremanctl releases bundle specific versions of Foreman with version-compatible dependencies and plugins. Specific versions of foremanctl always map to the same version of Foreman, regardless of parameter configuration:

- 1.2.z+ -> Foreman 3.17
- 2.0.z -> Foreman 3.18
- 2.2.z+ -> Foreman 3.19

> TODO: This table needs an explanation for the Y stream schema. Ask Evgeni or Ewoud about this. Add a resource where users can match a Foreman version to a foremanctl version.

Author: @ehelms on the previous PR you mentioned "This assumes we intend users to use it from git for production rather than the RPM. That's a design question we haven't tried to answer."

Does it make sense to leave this part out or maybe move this into the developer docs since the rest of this doc assumes installing/upgrading from RPM.

Reviewer 4: I think the latter makes sense.
